## Machine Learning Source Classifiers for SNP filtering

When combining DNA sequences from two different sources, it's critical to eliminate any SNP that, by itself or combined, reveals the source of the samples. As far as the DNA sequences are from similar species or ancestries, the distribution of zeros and ones should be similar between SNPs coming from different origins. In case there is a substantial difference in the SNP distributions, a sequencing error most certainly occurred. Alternatively, in the situation when missing allele data was inferred through an imputation model, a change in the SNP means between sources could suggest that the model used for inferring a portion of the allele data was insufficiently accurate. Such SNPs might irreversibly contaminate any analysis constructed on top of it, so they should be carefully dealt with.

The [DataFix](https://github.com/AI-sandbox/Datafix) tool encompasses detecting the corrupted SNPs with DF-Locate. It uses Machine Learning models to detect shifted features between a reference dataset (considered to contain high-quality data) and a query dataset (which might contain a subset of partially or completely corrupted features). DF-Correct includes another functionality, DF-Correct, to correct the detected erroneous features by DF-Locate. Applied to bioinformatics, DF-Locate would be responsible for detecting any SNP with a high amount of erroneous values, while DF-Correct would exploit the correlations in the *correct* reference dataset, in an effort to correct the corrupted SNPs by DF-Locate. Hence, we suggest running DataFix for genomic data homogenization before merging data from two different sources. More details on how to efficiently correct erroneous SNPs can be found [here](https://github.com/AI-sandbox/MergeGenome/blob/main/readmes/README_15_store_allele_data_npy_h5.md).